..  Copyright (C) 2014 AoPS Incorporated
..  Copyright (C)  Peter Wentworth, Jeffrey Elkner, Allen B. Downey and Chris Meyers.
    Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
    under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
    or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
    with Invariant Sections being Foreword, Preface, and Contributor List, no
    Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is
    included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".

|
    
Inheritance
===========


Inheritance
-----------

The language feature most often associated with object-oriented programming is
**inheritance**. Inheritance is the ability to define a new class that is a
modified version of an existing class.

The primary advantage of this feature is that you can add new methods to a
class without modifying the existing class. It is called inheritance because
the new class inherits all of the methods of the existing class. Extending this
metaphor, the existing class is sometimes called the **parent** class. The new
class may be called the **child** class or sometimes subclass.

Inheritance is a powerful feature. Some programs that would be complicated
without inheritance can be written concisely and simply with it. Also,
inheritance can facilitate code reuse, since you can customize the behavior of
parent classes without having to modify them. In some cases, the inheritance
structure reflects the natural structure of the problem, which makes the
program easier to understand.

On the other hand, inheritance can make programs difficult to read.  When a
method is invoked, it is sometimes not clear where to find its definition. The
relevant code may be scattered among several modules.  Also, many of the things
that can be done using inheritance can be done as elegantly (or more so)
without it. If the natural structure of the problem does not lend itself to
inheritance, this style of programming can do more harm than good.

In this chapter we will demonstrate the use of inheritance as part of a program
that plays the card game Old Maid. One of our goals is to write code that could
be reused to implement other card games.


A hand of cards
---------------

For almost any card game, we need to represent a hand of cards. A hand is
similar to a deck, of course. Both are made up of a set of cards, and both
require operations like adding and removing cards. Also, we might like the
ability to shuffle both decks and hands.

A hand is also different from a deck. Depending on the game being played, we
might want to perform some operations on hands that don't make sense for a
deck. For example, in poker we might classify a hand (straight, flush, etc.) or
compare it with another hand. In bridge, we might want to compute a score for a
hand in order to make a bid.

This situation suggests the use of inheritance. If ``Hand`` is a subclass of
``Deck``, it will have all the methods of ``Deck``, and new methods can be
added.

We add the code in this chapter to our codd from the previous chapter.
In the class definition, the name of the parent class appears in parentheses:

.. code-block:: none
        
   class Hand(Deck):
       pass

This statement indicates that the new ``Hand`` class inherits from the existing
``Deck`` class.

The ``Hand`` constructor initializes the attributes for the hand, which are
``name`` and ``cards``. The string ``name`` identifies this hand, probably by
the name of the player that holds it. The name is an optional parameter with
the empty string as a default value. ``cards`` is the list of cards in the
hand, initialized to the empty list:

.. activecode:: handinit
        
   class Card:
       suits = ["Clubs", "Diamonds", "Hearts", "Spades"]
       ranks = ["narf", "Ace", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7",
                "8", "9", "10", "Jack", "Queen", "King"]
   
       def __init__(self, suit=0, rank=0):
           self.suit = suit
           self.rank = rank
            
       def __str__(self):
           return (self.ranks[self.rank] + " of " + self.suits[self.suit])
        
       def cmp(self, other):
           # Check the suits
           if self.suit > other.suit: 
               return 1
           if self.suit < other.suit:
               return -1
           # Suits are the same... check ranks
           if self.rank > other.rank:
               return 1
           if self.rank < other.rank:
               return -1
           # Ranks are the same... it's a tie
           return 0
        
       def __eq__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) == 0

       def __le__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) <= 0

       def __ge__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) >= 0

       def __gt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) > 0

       def __lt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) < 0

       def __ne__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) != 0        
        
   class Deck:
            
       def __init__(self):
           self.cards = []
           for suit in range(4):
               for rank in range(1, 14):
                   self.cards.append(Card(suit, rank))

       def __str__(self):
           s = ""
           for card in self.cards:
               s += str(card) + '\n'
           return s

       def shuffle(self):
           import random
           random.shuffle(self.cards)

       def remove(self, card):
           if card in self.cards:
               self.cards.remove(card)
               return True 
           else:
               return False 

       def pop(self):
           return self.cards.pop()

       def is_empty(self):
           return self.cards == []

   class Hand(Deck):

       def __init__(self, name=""):
           self.cards = []
           self.name = name

For just about any card game, it is necessary to add and remove cards from the
deck. Removing cards is already taken care of, since ``Hand`` inherits
``remove`` from ``Deck``. But we have to write ``add``. We use the list ``append`` method to add the new card to the end of the list of cards.


.. activecode:: handadd
        
   class Card:
       suits = ["Clubs", "Diamonds", "Hearts", "Spades"]
       ranks = ["narf", "Ace", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7",
                "8", "9", "10", "Jack", "Queen", "King"]
   
       def __init__(self, suit=0, rank=0):
           self.suit = suit
           self.rank = rank
            
       def __str__(self):
           return (self.ranks[self.rank] + " of " + self.suits[self.suit])
        
       def cmp(self, other):
           # Check the suits
           if self.suit > other.suit: 
               return 1
           if self.suit < other.suit:
               return -1
           # Suits are the same... check ranks
           if self.rank > other.rank:
               return 1
           if self.rank < other.rank:
               return -1
           # Ranks are the same... it's a tie
           return 0
        
       def __eq__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) == 0

       def __le__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) <= 0

       def __ge__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) >= 0

       def __gt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) > 0

       def __lt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) < 0

       def __ne__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) != 0        
        
   class Deck:
            
       def __init__(self):
           self.cards = []
           for suit in range(4):
               for rank in range(1, 14):
                   self.cards.append(Card(suit, rank))

       def __str__(self):
           s = ""
           for card in self.cards:
               s += str(card) + '\n'
           return s

       def shuffle(self):
           import random
           random.shuffle(self.cards)

       def remove(self, card):
           if card in self.cards:
               self.cards.remove(card)
               return True 
           else:
               return False 

       def pop(self):
           return self.cards.pop()

       def is_empty(self):
           return self.cards == []

   class Hand(Deck):

       def __init__(self, name=""):
           self.cards = []
           self.name = name

       def add(self, card):
           self.cards.append(card)

   myHand = Hand('Joe')
   myHand.add(Card(0,3))
   myHand.add(Card(3,12))
   print(myHand)



Dealing cards
-------------

Now that we have a ``Hand`` class, we want to deal cards from the ``Deck`` into
hands. It is not immediately obvious whether this method should go in the
``Hand`` class or in the ``Deck`` class, but since it operates on a single deck
and (possibly) several hands, it is more natural to put it in ``Deck``.

``deal`` should be fairly general, since different games will have different
requirements. We may want to deal out the entire deck at once or add one card
to each hand.

``deal`` takes two parameters, a list (or tuple) of hands and the total number
of cards to deal. If there are not enough cards in the deck, the method deals
out all of the cards and stops:

.. activecode:: handdeal
        
   class Card:
       suits = ["Clubs", "Diamonds", "Hearts", "Spades"]
       ranks = ["narf", "Ace", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7",
                "8", "9", "10", "Jack", "Queen", "King"]
   
       def __init__(self, suit=0, rank=0):
           self.suit = suit
           self.rank = rank
            
       def __str__(self):
           return (self.ranks[self.rank] + " of " + self.suits[self.suit])
        
       def cmp(self, other):
           # Check the suits
           if self.suit > other.suit: 
               return 1
           if self.suit < other.suit:
               return -1
           # Suits are the same... check ranks
           if self.rank > other.rank:
               return 1
           if self.rank < other.rank:
               return -1
           # Ranks are the same... it's a tie
           return 0
        
       def __eq__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) == 0

       def __le__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) <= 0

       def __ge__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) >= 0

       def __gt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) > 0

       def __lt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) < 0

       def __ne__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) != 0        
        
   class Deck:
            
       def __init__(self):
           self.cards = []
           for suit in range(4):
               for rank in range(1, 14):
                   self.cards.append(Card(suit, rank))

       def __str__(self):
           s = ""
           for card in self.cards:
               s += str(card) + '\n'
           return s

       def shuffle(self):
           import random
           random.shuffle(self.cards)

       def remove(self, card):
           if card in self.cards:
               self.cards.remove(card)
               return True 
           else:
               return False 

       def pop(self):
           return self.cards.pop()

       def is_empty(self):
           return self.cards == []

       def deal(self, hands, numCards=999):
           numHands = len(hands)
           for i in range(numCards):
               if self.is_empty():
                   break                    # Break if out of cards
               card = self.pop()            # Take the top card
               hand = hands[i % numHands]  # Whose turn is next?
               hand.add(card)               # Add the card to the hand

   class Hand(Deck):

       def __init__(self, name=""):
           self.cards = []
           self.name = name

       def add(self, card):
           self.cards.append(card)

   hand1 = Hand("Hand 1")
   hand2 = Hand("Hand 2")
   myDeck = Deck()
   myDeck.shuffle()
   # deal 5 cards to each player
   myDeck.deal([hand1,hand2],10)
   print(hand1)
   print(hand2)
   # should be 42 cards left in the deck
   print(len(myDeck.cards))

The second parameter, ``numCards``, is optional; the default is a large
number, which effectively means that all of the cards in the deck will get
dealt.

The loop variable ``i`` goes from 0 to ``numCards-1``. Each time through the
loop, a card is removed from the deck using the list method ``pop``, which
removes and returns the last item in the list.

The modulus operator (``%``) allows us to deal cards in a round robin (one
card at a time to each hand). When ``i`` is equal to the number of hands in the
list, the expression ``i % numHands`` wraps around to the beginning of the list
(index 0).


Printing a Hand
---------------

To print the contents of a hand, we can take advantage of the 
``__str__`` method inherited from ``Deck``. Although it is convenient to inherit the existing methods, there is additional
information in a ``Hand`` object we might want to include when we print one. To
do that, we can provide a ``__str__`` method in the ``Hand`` class that
overrides the one in the ``Deck`` class:

.. activecode:: handstr
        
   class Card:
       suits = ["Clubs", "Diamonds", "Hearts", "Spades"]
       ranks = ["narf", "Ace", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7",
                "8", "9", "10", "Jack", "Queen", "King"]
   
       def __init__(self, suit=0, rank=0):
           self.suit = suit
           self.rank = rank
            
       def __str__(self):
           return (self.ranks[self.rank] + " of " + self.suits[self.suit])
        
       def cmp(self, other):
           # Check the suits
           if self.suit > other.suit: 
               return 1
           if self.suit < other.suit:
               return -1
           # Suits are the same... check ranks
           if self.rank > other.rank:
               return 1
           if self.rank < other.rank:
               return -1
           # Ranks are the same... it's a tie
           return 0
        
       def __eq__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) == 0

       def __le__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) <= 0

       def __ge__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) >= 0

       def __gt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) > 0

       def __lt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) < 0

       def __ne__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) != 0        
        
   class Deck:
            
       def __init__(self):
           self.cards = []
           for suit in range(4):
               for rank in range(1, 14):
                   self.cards.append(Card(suit, rank))

       def __str__(self):
           s = ""
           for card in self.cards:
               s += str(card) + '\n'
           return s

       def shuffle(self):
           import random
           random.shuffle(self.cards)

       def remove(self, card):
           if card in self.cards:
               self.cards.remove(card)
               return True 
           else:
               return False 

       def pop(self):
           return self.cards.pop()

       def is_empty(self):
           return self.cards == []

       def deal(self, hands, numCards=999):
           numHands = len(hands)
           for i in range(numCards):
               if self.is_empty():
                   break                    # Break if out of cards
               card = self.pop()            # Take the top card
               hand = hands[i % numHands]  # Whose turn is next?
               hand.add(card)               # Add the card to the hand

   class Hand(Deck):

       def __init__(self, name=""):
           self.cards = []
           self.name = name

       def add(self, card):
           self.cards.append(card)

       def __str__(self):
           s = "Hand " + self.name
           if self.is_empty():
               s += " is empty\n"
           else:
               s += " contains\n"
           return s + Deck.__str__(self)

   hand1 = Hand("Hand 1")
   hand2 = Hand("Hand 2")
   myDeck = Deck()
   myDeck.shuffle()
   # deal 5 cards to each player
   myDeck.deal([hand1,hand2],10)
   print(hand1)
   print(hand2)

Initially, ``s`` is a string that identifies the hand. If the hand is empty,
the program appends the words ``is empty`` and returns ``s``.

Otherwise, the program appends the word ``contains`` and the string
representation of the ``Deck``, computed by invoking the ``__str__`` method in
the ``Deck`` class on ``self``.

It may seem odd to send ``self``, which refers to the current ``Hand``, to a
``Deck`` method, until you remember that a ``Hand`` is a kind of ``Deck``.
``Hand`` objects can do everything ``Deck`` objects can, so it is legal to send
a ``Hand`` to a ``Deck`` method.

In general, it is always legal to use an instance of a subclass in place of an
instance of a parent class.


The ``CardGame`` class
----------------------

.. activecode:: cardgameinit
   :nolinenums:
   :norun:
        
   class CardGame:
   
       def __init__(self):
           self.deck = Deck()
           self.deck.shuffle()

This is the first case we have seen where the initialization method performs a
significant computation, beyond initializing attributes.

To implement specific games, we can inherit from ``CardGame`` and add features
for the new game. As an example, we'll write a simulation of Old Maid.

The object of Old Maid is to get rid of cards in your hand. You do this by
matching cards by rank and color. For example, the 4 of Clubs matches the 4 of
Spades since both suits are black. The Jack of Hearts matches the Jack of
Diamonds since both are red.

To begin the game, the Queen of Clubs is removed from the deck so that the
Queen of Spades has no match. The fifty-one remaining cards are dealt to the
players in a round robin. After the deal, all players match and discard as many
cards as possible.

When no more matches can be made, play begins. In turn, each player picks a
card (without looking) from the closest neighbor to the left who still has
cards. If the chosen card matches a card in the player's hand, the pair is
removed. Otherwise, the card is added to the player's hand. Eventually all
possible matches are made, leaving only the Queen of Spades in the loser's
hand.

In our computer simulation of the game, the computer plays all hands.
Unfortunately, some nuances of the real game are lost. In a real game, the
player with the Old Maid goes to some effort to get their neighbor to pick that
card, by displaying it a little more prominently, or perhaps failing to display
it more prominently, or even failing to fail to display that card more
prominently. The computer simply picks a neighbor's card at random.


``OldMaidHand`` class
---------------------

A hand for playing Old Maid requires some abilities beyond the general
abilities of a ``Hand``. We will define a new class, ``OldMaidHand``, that
inherits from ``Hand`` and provides an additional method called
``remove_matches``:

.. activecode:: oldmainhandinit
   :nolinenums:
   :norun:
        
   class OldMaidHand(Hand):

       def remove_matches(self):
           count = 0
           originalCards = self.cards[:]
           for card in originalCards:
               match = Card(3 - card.suit, card.rank)
               if match in self.cards:
                   self.cards.remove(card)
                   self.cards.remove(match)
                   print("Hand "+self.name+":",end=' ')
                   print(str(card)+" matches "+str(match))
                   count += 1
           return count

We start by making a copy of the list of cards, so that we can traverse the
copy while removing cards from the original. Since ``self.cards`` is modified
in the loop, we don't want to use it to control the traversal. Python can get
quite confused if it is traversing a list that is changing!

For each card in the hand, we figure out what the matching card is and go
looking for it. The match card has the same rank and the other suit of the same
color. The expression ``3 - card.suit`` turns a Club (suit 0) into a Spade
(suit 3) and a Diamond (suit 1) into a Heart (suit 2).  You should satisfy
yourself that the opposite operations also work. If the match card is also in
the hand, both cards are removed.

The following example adds our new classes to our existing code, and demonstrates how to use ``remove_matches``:


.. activecode:: oldmaidmatch
        
   class Card:
       suits = ["Clubs", "Diamonds", "Hearts", "Spades"]
       ranks = ["narf", "Ace", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7",
                "8", "9", "10", "Jack", "Queen", "King"]
   
       def __init__(self, suit=0, rank=0):
           self.suit = suit
           self.rank = rank
            
       def __str__(self):
           return (self.ranks[self.rank] + " of " + self.suits[self.suit])
        
       def cmp(self, other):
           # Check the suits
           if self.suit > other.suit: 
               return 1
           if self.suit < other.suit:
               return -1
           # Suits are the same... check ranks
           if self.rank > other.rank:
               return 1
           if self.rank < other.rank:
               return -1
           # Ranks are the same... it's a tie
           return 0
        
       def __eq__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) == 0

       def __le__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) <= 0

       def __ge__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) >= 0

       def __gt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) > 0

       def __lt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) < 0

       def __ne__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) != 0        
        
   class Deck:
            
       def __init__(self):
           self.cards = []
           for suit in range(4):
               for rank in range(1, 14):
                   self.cards.append(Card(suit, rank))

       def __str__(self):
           s = ""
           for card in self.cards:
               s += str(card) + '\n'
           return s

       def shuffle(self):
           import random
           random.shuffle(self.cards)

       def remove(self, card):
           if card in self.cards:
               self.cards.remove(card)
               return True 
           else:
               return False 

       def pop(self):
           return self.cards.pop()

       def is_empty(self):
           return self.cards == []

       def deal(self, hands, numCards=999):
           numHands = len(hands)
           for i in range(numCards):
               if self.is_empty():
                   break                    # Break if out of cards
               card = self.pop()            # Take the top card
               hand = hands[i % numHands]  # Whose turn is next?
               hand.add(card)               # Add the card to the hand

   class Hand(Deck):

       def __init__(self, name=""):
           self.cards = []
           self.name = name

       def add(self, card):
           self.cards.append(card)

       def __str__(self):
           s = "Hand " + self.name
           if self.is_empty():
               s += " is empty\n"
           else:
               s += " contains\n"
           return s + Deck.__str__(self)

   class CardGame:
   
       def __init__(self):
           self.deck = Deck()
           self.deck.shuffle()

   class OldMaidHand(Hand):

       def remove_matches(self):
           count = 0
           originalCards = self.cards[:]
           for card in originalCards:
               match = Card(3 - card.suit, card.rank)
               if match in self.cards:
                   self.cards.remove(card)
                   self.cards.remove(match)
                   print("Hand "+self.name+":",end=' ')
                   print(str(card)+" matches "+str(match))
                   count += 1
           return count

   game = CardGame()             # start a new game
   hand = OldMaidHand("Frank")   # initialize a new Old Maid hand called "Frank"
   game.deck.deal([hand], 13)    # deal 13 cards to Frank
   print(hand)
   hand.remove_matches()         # remove the matches
   print(hand)

Notice that there is no ``__init__`` method for the ``OldMaidHand`` class.  We
inherit it from ``Hand``.


``OldMaidGame`` class
---------------------

Now we can turn our attention to the game itself. ``OldMaidGame`` is a subclass
of ``CardGame`` with a new method called ``play`` that takes a list of players
as a parameter.

Since ``__init__`` is inherited from ``CardGame``, a new ``OldMaidGame`` object
contains a new shuffled deck:

.. activecode:: oldmaidgameinit
   :norun:
        
   class OldMaidGame(CardGame):

       def play(self, names):
           # Remove Queen of Clubs
           self.deck.remove(Card(0,12))
           
           # Make a hand for each player
           self.hands = []
           for name in names:
               self.hands.append(OldMaidHand(name))
           
           # Deal the cards
           self.deck.deal(self.hands)
           print("---------- Cards have been dealt")
           self.print_hands()
           
           # Remove initial matches
           matches = self.remove_all_matches()
           print("---------- Matches discarded, play begins")
           self.print_hands()
           
           # Play until all 50 cards are matched
           turn = 0
           numHands = len(self.hands)
           while matches < 25:
               matches += self.play_one_turn(turn)
               turn = (turn + 1) % numHands
           
           print("---------- Game is Over")
           self.print_hands()


Some of the steps of the game have been separated into methods that we stil have to write.

``print_hands`` just traverses the list of hands and prints each one:

.. activecode:: oldmaidgameprinthands
   :norun:

       def print_hands(self):
           for hand in self.hands:
               print(hand)


``remove_all_matches`` traverses the list of hands and invokes
``remove_matches`` on each:

.. activecode:: oldmaidgameremove
   :norun:

       def remove_all_matches(self):
           count = 0
           for hand in self.hands:
               count += hand.remove_matches()
           return count

``count`` is an accumulator that adds up the number of matches in each
hand. When we've gone through every hand, the total is returned
(``count``).

When the total number of matches reaches twenty-five, fifty cards have been
removed from the hands, which means that only one card is left and the game is
over.

The variable ``turn`` keeps track of which player's turn it is. It starts at 0
and increases by one each time; when it reaches ``numHands``, the modulus
operator wraps it back around to 0.

The method ``play_one_turn`` takes a parameter that indicates whose turn it is.
The return value is the number of matches made during this turn:

.. activecode:: oldmaidgameoneturn
   :norun:
        
       def play_one_turn(self, i):
           if self.hands[i].is_empty():
               return 0
           neighbor = self.find_neighbor(i)
           pickedCard = self.hands[neighbor].pop()
           self.hands[i].add(pickedCard)
           print("Hand", self.hands[i].name, "picked", pickedCard)
           count = self.hands[i].remove_matches()
           self.hands[i].shuffle()
           return count

If a player's hand is empty, that player is out of the game, so he or she does
nothing and returns 0.

Otherwise, a turn consists of finding the first player on the left that has
cards, taking one card from the neighbor, and checking for matches. Before
returning, the cards in the hand are shuffled so that the next player's choice
is random.

The method ``find_neighbor`` starts with the player to the immediate left and
continues around the circle until it finds a player that still has cards:

.. activecode:: oldmaidgamefindneighbor
   :norun:

       def find_neighbor(self, i):
           numHands = len(self.hands)
           for next in range(1,numHands):
               neighbor = (i + next) % numHands
               if not self.hands[neighbor].is_empty():
                   return neighbor

If ``find_neighbor`` ever went all the way around the circle without finding
cards, it would return ``None`` and cause an error elsewhere in the program.
Fortunately, we can prove that that will never happen (as long as the end of
the game is detected correctly).

Let's add all these new methods to our code, and then you can play the game!

.. activecode:: oldmaidfullgame
        
   class Card:
       suits = ["Clubs", "Diamonds", "Hearts", "Spades"]
       ranks = ["narf", "Ace", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7",
                "8", "9", "10", "Jack", "Queen", "King"]
   
       def __init__(self, suit=0, rank=0):
           self.suit = suit
           self.rank = rank
            
       def __str__(self):
           return (self.ranks[self.rank] + " of " + self.suits[self.suit])
        
       def cmp(self, other):
           # Check the suits
           if self.suit > other.suit: 
               return 1
           if self.suit < other.suit:
               return -1
           # Suits are the same... check ranks
           if self.rank > other.rank:
               return 1
           if self.rank < other.rank:
               return -1
           # Ranks are the same... it's a tie
           return 0
        
       def __eq__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) == 0

       def __le__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) <= 0

       def __ge__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) >= 0

       def __gt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) > 0

       def __lt__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) < 0

       def __ne__(self, other):
           return self.cmp(other) != 0        
        
   class Deck:
            
       def __init__(self):
           self.cards = []
           for suit in range(4):
               for rank in range(1, 14):
                   self.cards.append(Card(suit, rank))

       def __str__(self):
           s = ""
           for card in self.cards:
               s += str(card) + '\n'
           return s

       def shuffle(self):
           import random
           random.shuffle(self.cards)

       def remove(self, card):
           if card in self.cards:
               self.cards.remove(card)
               return True 
           else:
               return False 

       def pop(self):
           return self.cards.pop()

       def is_empty(self):
           return self.cards == []

       def deal(self, hands, numCards=999):
           numHands = len(hands)
           for i in range(numCards):
               if self.is_empty():
                   break                    # Break if out of cards
               card = self.pop()            # Take the top card
               hand = hands[i % numHands]  # Whose turn is next?
               hand.add(card)               # Add the card to the hand

   class Hand(Deck):

       def __init__(self, name=""):
           self.cards = []
           self.name = name

       def add(self, card):
           self.cards.append(card)

       def __str__(self):
           s = "Hand " + self.name
           if self.is_empty():
               s += " is empty\n"
           else:
               s += " contains\n"
           return s + Deck.__str__(self)

   class CardGame:
   
       def __init__(self):
           self.deck = Deck()
           self.deck.shuffle()

   class OldMaidHand(Hand):

       def remove_matches(self):
           count = 0
           originalCards = self.cards[:]
           for card in originalCards:
               match = Card(3 - card.suit, card.rank)
               if match in self.cards:
                   self.cards.remove(card)
                   self.cards.remove(match)
                   print("Hand "+self.name+":",end=' ')
                   print(str(card)+" matches "+str(match))
                   count += 1
           return count

   class OldMaidGame(CardGame):

       def play(self, names):
           # Remove Queen of Clubs
           self.deck.remove(Card(0,12))
           
           # Make a hand for each player
           self.hands = []
           for name in names:
               self.hands.append(OldMaidHand(name))
           
           # Deal the cards
           self.deck.deal(self.hands)
           print("---------- Cards have been dealt")
           self.print_hands()
           
           # Remove initial matches
           matches = self.remove_all_matches()
           print("---------- Matches discarded, play begins")
           self.print_hands()
           
           # Play until all 50 cards are matched
           turn = 0
           numHands = len(self.hands)
           while matches < 25:
               matches += self.play_one_turn(turn)
               turn = (turn + 1) % numHands
           
           print("---------- Game is Over")
           self.print_hands()

       def print_hands(self):
           for hand in self.hands:
               print(hand)

       def remove_all_matches(self):
           count = 0
           for hand in self.hands:
               count += hand.remove_matches()
           return count

       def play_one_turn(self, i):
           if self.hands[i].is_empty():
               return 0
           neighbor = self.find_neighbor(i)
           pickedCard = self.hands[neighbor].pop()
           self.hands[i].add(pickedCard)
           print("Hand", self.hands[i].name, "picked", pickedCard)
           count = self.hands[i].remove_matches()
           self.hands[i].shuffle()
           return count

       def find_neighbor(self, i):
           numHands = len(self.hands)
           for next in range(1,numHands):
               neighbor = (i + next) % numHands
               if not self.hands[neighbor].is_empty():
                   return neighbor

   game = OldMaidGame()
   game.play(["Allen","Betsy","Carl","Diane"])


Glossary
--------

.. glossary::

    inheritance
        The ability to define a new class that is a modified version of a
        previously defined class.

    parent class
        The class from which a child class inherits.

    child class
        A new class created by inheriting from an existing class; also called a
        subclass.
